.TH diskd 1 "19Jun04" fdutils-5.4
.SH Name
diskd - disk daemon; wait for disk to be inserted
'\" t
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..

.tr \(is'
.tr \(if`
.tr \(pd"

.SH Description
.iX "p diskd"
.PP
The diskd command has the following syntax:
.PP
 
.nf
.ft 3
.in +0.3i
\&\fR\&\f(CWdiskd [\fR\&\f(CW-d \fIdrive\fR\&\f(CW] [\fR\&\f(CW-i \fIinterval\fR\&\f(CW] [\fR\&\f(CW-e \fIcommand\fR\&\f(CW]
.fi
.in -0.3i
.ft R
.lp
 
\&\fR
.PP
Diskd waits for a disk to be inserted into a given \fIdrive\fR, and then
either executes the \fIcommand\fR or exits. This program can be used to
automatically mount a disk as soon as it is inserted.
.PP
.SH Warning
.PP
This program works by switching the motor on for a very short
interval, and then seeking to track -1. This might damage hardware in
the long run. Amigas, which also use these techniques, are known for
having problems with their disk drives no longer spinning up properly
after a few month of usage.
.PP
.SH Options
.TP
\&\fR\&\f(CW-d\ \fIdrive\fR\&\f(CW\fR\ 
Selects the drive to observe for disk insertion. By default, drive 0
(\fR\&\f(CW/dev/fd0\fR) is observed.
.TP
\&\fR\&\f(CW-i\ \fIinterval\fR\&\f(CW\fR\ 
Selects the polling interval. The interval is given in tenths of
seconds. Default is 10 (one second).
.TP
\&\fR\&\f(CW-e\ \fIcommand\fR\&\f(CW\fR\ 
Gives the command to be executed when a disk is inserted. If no
command is given the program simply exits. Typically, the command
mounts the disk. It can be a shell scripts which probes for several
filesystems and disk geometries until it succeeds.
.PP
.SH Bugs
.IP
.TP
* \ \ 
Automatic unmounting cannot yet be handled. It is indeed not enough to
scan for disk removal, because when the disk is removed, it is already
too late: There might be some buffers needing flushing.  However, the
\&\fR\&\f(CWfdmountd\fR program allows automatic unmounting by using the
\&\fR\&\f(CWSYNC\fR mount options, which switches off write buffering
(see section  fdmount).
.TP
* \ \ 
The drive motor is running all the time, and on some computers, the
drive led flickers at each time the drive is polled.  
.SH Note
This manpage has been automatically generated from fdutils's texinfo
documentation.  Some information may be lost during this process.
.SH See Also
.IR /usr/share/doc/fdutils/Fdutils.html ,
Fdutils' texinfo doc
