\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename fdutils.info
@settitle Fdutils
@c UPDATE THIS DATE WHENEVER YOU MAKE CHANGES!
@c For double-sided printing, uncomment:
@c @setchapternewpage odd
@setchapternewpage off
@c %**end of header

@c MANtitle fdutils 1 "1Jul1999" fdutils
@c MANskip

@set EDITION 5.5
@set VERSION 5.5
@set UPDATED Mar 2005

@iftex
@finalout
@end iftex

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* Fdutils: (fdutils).        Fdutils: Linux' floppy utilities
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo


@ifinfo
Fdutils
Copyright (C) 1993-2000 Alain Knaff

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.


@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Fdutils
@subtitle Linux floppy utilities
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for Fdutils version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by Alain Knaff
@page

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996 Alain Knaff.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top, Location, (dir), (dir)
@end ifinfo

@c MANend-skip

@unnumbered General Introduction

Fdutils is a collection of utililties for configuring and using the
Linux floppy driver.  With fdutils, you can:

@enumerate
@item
Format disks with a higher capacity than usual (up to 1992KB on a 3 1/2
HD disk).
@item
Reconfigure the autodetection sequence to automatically detect some of
these extended formats.
@item
Access various internal driver structures and drive configuration using
the floppycontrol program.
@end enumerate

This manual describes these utilities, and also the floppy driver
itself.

@menu
* Location::                   Where to get fdutils and its documentation
* Basic usage::                How to get started
* Device numbers::         
* Media description::          How can a floppy disk and a format be described
                               to fdutils?
* Drive descriptions::         How can a drive and its characteristics be 
                               described to fdutils?
* Extended formats::           How to store more data on your floppy disks
* Autodetection::              How the floppy driver distinguishes among the
                               different kinds of disks
* Boottime configuration::     Lilo boot options understood by the floppy driver
* Floppy ioctls::              The ioctl's understood by the floppy driver
* Commands::                   The available fdutils commands
* Compile-time configuration:: How to use GNU autoconf to customize fdutils
* Acronyms::                   A brief listing of acronyms used in this
                               documentation
* Interesting formats::        A brief list of legacy and other formats
* Command Index::              Command Index
* Concept Index::              Concept Index
@end menu



@include location.texi
@include tips.texi
@include formatlist.texi
@include mediaprm.texi
@include driveprm.texi
@include moredata.texi
@include autodetect.texi
@include lilo.texi
@include ioctl.texi
@c MANskip
@include commands.texi
@c MANend-skip
@include configure.texi
@include acronyms.texi
@include format2.texi

@c MANskip
@node Command Index, Concept Index,  Interesting formats, Top
@unnumbered Command Index
@printindex pg

@node Concept Index, , Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept index
@printindex cp

@contents
@c MANend-skip
@bye
