@node Location, Basic usage, Top, Top
@chapter Where to get fdutils and its documentation
@cindex bugs
@cindex ALPHA patches
@cindex patches
@cindex diffs
@cindex mailing list

Fdutils can be found at the following places (+ mirrors):
@example
ftp://linux.wauug.org/pub/knaff/fdutils/fdutils-5.2.tar.gz
ftp://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/Linux/utils/disk-management/fdutils-5.2.tar.gz
ftp://tsx-11.mit.edu/pub/linux/sources/sbin/fdutils-5.2.tar.gz
@end example

The FAQ included in this package is also available separetely at:
@example
http://www.club.innet.lu/~year3160/floppy/FAQ.html
http://linux.wauug.org/pub/knaff/floppy/FAQ.html
@end example
The FAQ at www.club.innet.lu and linux.wauug.org is usually more up to
date than versions found elsewhere.  Thus, if you don't find an answer
in the copy of the FAQ you have, please check this one for more recent
info.

Before reporting a bug, make sure that it has not yet been fixed in the
Alpha patches which can be found at:
@example
http://www.club.innet.lu/~year3160/fdutils
ftp://linux.wauug.org/pub/knaff/fdutils
@end example

Note: It is highly probable that the innet address will cease to exist
after November 1997.  The wauug address is permanent.

These patches are named
@code{fdutils-}@var{version}@code{-}@var{ddmm}@code{.taz}, where version
stands for the base version, @var{dd} for the day and @var{mm} for the
month. Due to a lack of space, I usually leave only the most recent
patch.

There is an fdutils mailing list at fdutils @@ linux.wauug.org .  Please
send all bug reports to this list.  You may subscribe to the list by
sending a message with 'subscribe fdutils @@ linux.wauug.org' in its
body to majordomo @@ linux.wauug.org . (N.B. Please remove the spaces
around the "@@" both times. I left them there in order to fool
spambots.)  Announcements of new fdutils versions will also be sent to
the list, in addition to the linux announce newsgroups.  The mailing
list is archived at http://linux.wauug.org/hypermail/fdutils/latest
