@node makefloppies, setfdprm, getfdprm, Commands
@section makefloppies

@example
@code{MAKEFLOPPIES} [@code{-tlvng}] [@var{drives}]
@end example

The @code{MAKEFLOPPIES} shell script creates the new floppy block device
node.  It uses the floppycontrol program to translate the minor device
numbers into meaningful names. It also uses these names to decide
whether to create a given block device file or not, depending on the
type of the physical drive (for instance, for a 3 1/2 drive, the formats
corresponding to a 5 1/4 drive are not created).

If you have more than two floppy drives, you need to tell the kernel
the CMOS types of those additional drives using the
@code{floppy=}@var{drive}@code{,}@var{type}@code{,cmos} lilo option.

If the @var{drives } parameter is given, only the device nodes for the
listed drives are made. By default, all only the two first drives are
tried.

@code{MAKEFLOPPIES} does not work if you redefine your default formats.

@strong{Caution}:
@code{MAKEFLOPPIES} removes already existing floppy device nodes.

@subsection Options

@table @code

@item -t
Use the old naming convention for 3 1/2 devices (e.g. @file{fd0H720}
instead of @file{fd0u720}).

@item -m
Base the name for the created devices on the type of the media
(e.g. @file{fd0h720} instead of @file{fd0u720}).

@item -l
Local. Creates device nodes in the local directory, not /dev

@item -v
Verbose

@item -n
Dry run. (just report what would be done, do not do anything)

@item -g
Group.  Allow read/write access to floppy devices only for group
@samp{floppy}

@end table

@subsection Bugs
The Makefloppies script does not work on redefined "default" formats, If
you redefine default formats, you need to create the needed device nodes
manually.
