.TH setfdprm 1 "19Jun04" fdutils-5.4
.SH Name
setfdprm - sets user-provided floppy disk parameters
'\" t
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..

.tr \(is'
.tr \(if`
.tr \(pd"

.SH Description
.iX "p setfdprm"
.iX "c setting the geometry information"
.iX "c geometry information (setting)"
.PP
 
.nf
.ft 3
.in +0.3i
\&\fR\&\f(CWsetfdprm [\fR\&\f(CW-p] \fIdevice\fR\&\f(CW \fImedia-description\fR\&\f(CW
\&\&
\&\fR\&\f(CWsetfdprm [\fR\&\f(CW-c | \fR\&\f(CW-y | \fR\&\f(CW-n] \fIdevice\fR\&\f(CW
\&\&
.fi
.in -0.3i
.ft R
.lp
 
\&\fR
.PP
\&\fR\&\f(CWsetfdprm\fR is a utility that can be used to load disk parameters
into the auto-detecting floppy devices and "fixed parameter" floppy
devices, to clear old parameter sets and to disable or enable diagnostic
messages.  These parameters are derived from a media-description,
see section  Media description for more details.
.PP
Without any options, \fR\&\f(CWsetfdprm\fR loads the \fIdevice\fR (for example
\&\fR\&\f(CW\(if/dev/fd0\(is\fR or \fR\&\f(CW\(if/dev/fd1\(is\fR) with a new parameter set with the
\&\fIname\fR entry found in \fR\&\f(CW\(if/etc/fdprm\(is\fR (usually named 360/360,
etc.).  For autodetecting floppy devices, these parameters stay in
effect until the media is changed. For "fixed parameter" devices, they
stay in effect until they are changed again.
.PP
\&\fR\&\f(CWSetfdprm\fR can also be used by the superuser to redefine the
default formats.
.PP
.SH Options
.IP
.TP
\&\fR\&\f(CW-p\ \fIdevice\ name\fR\&\f(CW\fR\ 
Permanently loads a new parameter set for the specified auto-configuring
floppy device for the configuration with \fIname\fR in
\&\fR\&\f(CW\(if/etc/fdprm\(is\fR. Alternatively, the parameters can be given directly
from the command line.
.TP
\&\fR\&\f(CW-c\ \fIdevice\fR\&\f(CW\fR\ 
Clears the parameter set of the specified auto-configuring floppy device.
.TP
\&\fR\&\f(CW-y\ \fIdevice\fR\&\f(CW\fR\ 
Enables format detection messages for the specified auto-configuring floppy
device.
.TP
\&\fR\&\f(CW-n\ \fIdevice\fR\&\f(CW\fR\ 
Disables format detection messages for the specified auto-configuring
floppy device.
.PP
.SH Bugs
This documentation is grossly incomplete.
.SH Note
This manpage has been automatically generated from fdutils's texinfo
documentation.  Some information may be lost during this process.
.SH See Also
.IR /usr/share/doc/fdutils/Fdutils.html ,
Fdutils' texinfo doc
