@node setfdprm, superformat, makefloppies, Commands
@section setfdprm
@pindex setfdprm
@cindex setting the geometry information
@cindex geometry information (setting)

@example
@code{setfdprm} [@code{-p}] @var{device} @var{media-description}

@code{setfdprm} [@code{-c} | @code{-y} | @code{-n}] @var{device}

@end example

@code{setfdprm} is a utility that can be used to load disk parameters
into the auto-detecting floppy devices and "fixed parameter" floppy
devices, to clear old parameter sets and to disable or enable diagnostic
messages.  These parameters are derived from a media-description,
@pxref{Media description} for more details.

Without any options, @code{setfdprm} loads the @var{device} (for example
@file{/dev/fd0} or @file{/dev/fd1}) with a new parameter set with the
@var{name} entry found in @file{/etc/fdprm} (usually named 360/360,
etc.).  For autodetecting floppy devices, these parameters stay in
effect until the media is changed. For "fixed parameter" devices, they
stay in effect until they are changed again.

@code{Setfdprm} can also be used by the superuser to redefine the
default formats.

@subsection Options

@table @code

@item -p @var{device name}
Permanently loads a new parameter set for the specified auto-configuring
floppy device for the configuration with @var{name} in
@file{/etc/fdprm}. Alternatively, the parameters can be given directly
from the command line.

@item -c @var{device}
Clears the parameter set of the specified auto-configuring floppy device.

@item -y @var{device}
Enables format detection messages for the specified auto-configuring floppy
device.

@item -n @var{device}
Disables format detection messages for the specified auto-configuring
floppy device.

@end table

@subsection Bugs
This documentation is grossly incomplete.
